# API and MCP

We are building two new components for the system: an API and and MCP Server.
These will allow scripting and interacting with Thrive programatically,
rather than just as a human.

We will define two new components: api and mcp. These will exist as
packages in the source tree, components that run in production, services
exposed to the outside world. They will both be FastAPI apps. We'll need
to do all the ceremonies of creating them (which adds up to a lot), but
is quite straightforward.

But there are two crucial architecture decisions:

* How to do auth - these are programs that will access the system, so the
  usual user+pass with JWT in an authorization header won't work.
* How to expose APIs commands - scanning the source tree feels wrong.
  We have to be more intentional.

## Auth

We'll have a notion of an API caller identity. This is typically defined
by an API key (with a name, and that can be revoked), and which allows
the machine to look like the human.

Crucially, we will make our API keys are under a human identity - the user.
Conversely, they will not be API keys of the workspace, or ones sitting
outside representing machine access to everything.

A key question is where to have the key management. Approaches:

* Have the key management in core in auth. We will create API key
  entities under the user, with the desired semantics. And use cases
  that turn an API key into a JWT.
  * WebUI will allow editing and working with keys.
  * WebAPI will expose endpoints to transform a key to a JWT
  * API route handlers will work like this on each request:
    * Send the request API key to the transform endpoint
    * Get the JWT and use it in a call to WebAPI
  * (+) We introduce a clear conceput
  * (+) We don't need to modify the WebAPI use case handling
  * (-) Every API call needs to translate the key to an JWT. Can
    cache these things, but that adds complexity.
* Have the key management in core in auth, and update controller
  logic to work with the key.
  * WebUI will allow editing and working with keys.
  * WebAPI will update use cases to work with an API key in the
    authorization code and make the swap locally.
  * API route handlers will work like this on each request:
    * Validate the request API has a good key
    * Attach it to the API data when calling into WebAPI
  * (+) Slightly more efficient
  * (-) We spread API key logic in many places
  * (-) WebAPI becomes complex. Ditto, any future services like it
    need to know about this.

We will go with the first option, as it is a clearer one. There
are mitigations - having a cache of `key => jwt` that can speedup
the translation.

We will keep the auth logic in core and WebAPI. There is good separation
between the domains right now, and an extra service will require
more hand-holding. We're not yet ready for microservices.

## Services

We will have an API service and an MCP service, different from the WebAPI
service. This is intentional, as we want to keep services largely
single responsability.

So we'll have:

* WebAPI handles the core domain logic, by embedding core directly in it.
  This is a very RPC-ish as a service.
* WebUI handles the frontend application client, and deals with
  rendering, frontend state management, etc. and calls out into WebAPI
* API handles programmatic access, auth management for these, versioning, etc.
  and calls into WebAPI. It also aims to be REST-ful.
* MCP handles chatbot/agent access, and calls into WebAPI.

Crucially, they are very explicit about what they expose. It is an act
of will to expose an API resource/endpoint, or a MCP resource. It will
forever bind us to maintain that interface more or less. Whereas WebAPI
needs to be able to move fast, and all endpoints are exposed.

In a near future, we will introduce a CLIGateway, which will be the service
the CLI app connects to, similar to how the webapp served by the browser
and running as JavaScript inside a browser, or electron/capacitor webview
speaks with WebUI, and not with WebAPI directly!

We will need to extend the framework with new app forms: for RESTApi
and MCP, that handle these situations (and more)!
